FR #982: Update Billed and Effective Cost Normative Requirements (#1966)
FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec: specification/supported_features/effective_cost.md

## Description

FOCUS enables practitioners to analyze costs on an [*accrual basis*](#glossary:accrual-based-accounting), where expenses are recognized when [*resources*](#glossary:resource) are consumed, [*services*](#glossary:service) are used, or [*contract commitments*](#glossary:contract-commitment) are recognized, regardless of when those costs are invoiced. The [EffectiveCost](#datasets.costandusage.effectivecost) column reflects all applicable pricing adjustments and distributes the cost of [*covering charges*](#glossary:covering-charge) (one-time or recurring purchases) to the [*covered charges*](#glossary:covered-charge) they offset.

> For [*charges*](#glossary:charge) that are not *covered charges*, EffectiveCost reflects the same amount as [BilledCost](#datasets.costandusage.billedcost). For *covering charges* (e.g., [*commitment discount*](#glossary:commitment-discount) purchases, prepaid marketplace subscriptions), EffectiveCost is 0 because their cost is recognized on the *covered charges* instead. In *commitment discount* scenarios, [CommitmentDiscountStatus](#datasets.costandusage.commitmentdiscountstatus) distinguishes whether amortized cost was allocated to consumed *resources* or *services* ("Used") or remained unallocated ("Unused").

Reviewer: This example in other files has commitments, prepaid purchases, and marketplace as three separate pieces. This is fine as is because it's just a set of examples, but I see no reason this shouldn't be consistent with the other examples.

```suggestion
For [*charges*](#glossary:charge) that are not *covered charges*, EffectiveCost reflects the same amount as [BilledCost](#datasets.costandusage.billedcost). For *covering charges* (e.g., [*commitment discount*](#glossary:commitment-discount) purchases, prepayments, or marketplace purchases), EffectiveCost is 0 because their cost is recognized on the *covered charges* instead. In *commitment discount* scenarios, [CommitmentDiscountStatus](#datasets.costandusage.commitmentdiscountstatus) distinguishes whether amortized cost was allocated to consumed *resources* or *services* ("Used") or remained unallocated ("Unused").
```

  SUM(EffectiveCost) AS TotalEffectiveCost,
  SUM(PricingQuantity) AS TotalPricingQuantity
FROM focus_data_table

> WHERE BillingPeriodStart >= ? AND BillingPeriodEnd < ?

Reviewer 2: Something to consider — when analyzing *EffectiveCost*, wouldn’t *charge period* be more relevant than *billing period*?

> Effective Cost represents the cost of a [*charge*](#glossary:charge) based on the [*resources*](#glossary:resource) used, [*services*](#glossary:service) used, or [*contract commitments*](#glossary:contract-commitment) recognized in a given [*charge period*](#glossary:charge-period).

```suggestion
WHERE ChargePeriodStart >= ? AND ChargePeriodEnd < ?
```

Reviewer 2: reminder: if we decide to switch to **charge period**, we need to cleanup the **Supporting Columns** list

> ## Supporting Columns
> * BillingPeriodEnd
> * BillingPeriodStart
> ...

Reviewer 3: Discussed in Mar 27 TF-3.  Need to add two queries: one for Billing, one for Charge, and have descriptions of the use case for both.  @Matt-Cowsert please address.

Author: Done in 567b103d. Rather than switching to ChargePeriod only, kept both queries per TF-3 Mar 27: the first uses BillingPeriod (cash-based alignment), the second uses ChargePeriod (consumption-based analysis). Added an intro paragraph explaining when each filter is appropriate, plus per-query use case descriptions.

Supporting Columns already includes both BillingPeriod* and ChargePeriod* columns, so no cleanup needed there.

Reviewer 3: LGTM.  @ijurica please confirm, and we can resolve.

Reviewer 2: LGTM.
